Israel says it will allow safe passage
for civilians in Northern Gaza after it
urged them to leave ahead of an expected
ground offensive Israeli officials said
two main roads would allow people to
escape safely until 400 p.m. local time
this comes after Israel's military on
Friday said infantry and tank units
entered Gaza to track down rocket Crews
destroy weapons and search for hostages
it says it found and repatriated the
bodies of some missing
Israelis well Israel has vowed to
destroy Hamas for its attacks a week ago
that killed more than a thousand
Israelis it is expected to carry out a
major offensive in Gaza the UN is
warning of a humanitarian
disaster another night lit up by
explosions Israel's military earlier
ordered more than a million people
living in the north of Gaza to move to
the South they were given 24 hours to
clear the area we've told people they
need to evacuate we expect them to
evacuate we are operating to restore
Safety and Security to the people of
Israel but the UN says it's impossible
for everyone to follow the
order moving more than 1 million people
across a densely populated war zone to a
place with no food water or
accommodation when the entire territory
is under siege is extremely dangerous
and in some cases
simply not possible hundreds of families
head south in cars and trucks while
Israeli air strikes level
buildings they fear nowhere is safe
caught between staying in their homes
under bombardment or risking the
dangerous road
Journey enough suffering and killing we
wake up to death under the bombs
we don't know where to go where is
safe with Gaza under the heaviest
Israeli bombardment it has ever seen
hospitals are
overwhelmed Israel is
unrepentant we are striking our enemies
with an unprecedented power I emphasize
it's just the beginning our enemies have
just begun to pay the price I can't
divulge what comes next but I can tell
you it's just the
beginning gaza's humanitarian crisis is
deepening by the day as well as the air
strikes Israel is blockading food and
water fuel and power RS groups are
calling for a secure Corridor to bring
in desperately needed
supplies let's get across to our
correspondent Tanya Kramer on Israel's
border with Gaza uh reporting live Tanya
with Israel having ordered more than a
million people in Northern Gaza to flee
South the IDF now saying it will allow
safe movement for Gins on two main roads
until 400 p.m. local time uh is there a
sense that a fullscale ground offensive
is imminent after that window
ends well this is of course a big
question but I don't think they will
tell us you know when they exactly move
in there will still be this moment of a
surprise but I mean what they're trying
to do now what they've been saying since
yesterday is to call on the people in
Northern Gaza which includes Gaza City
the heart of Gaza where over 1 million
people are in this area you to move down
south they said that they have these two
main roads that are usually the main
roads when you are in Gaza you travel
from the north to the South that people
should take those these are some kind of
safe corridors to travel uh to the
center of Gaza or to the South uh this
is at the moment uh what they're telling
people there to move because as uh one
of um the army people there said they
will hit hard and they're calling on
people to move but it's very very
difficult we're hearing also from the
you know humanitarian side I mean it's
not so easy for people just uh to move
South uh in in in in in this moment yeah
huge concerns from the UN and from
International Aid groups there about a
humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza what
can you tell us about the conditions
inside Gaza right
now well I mean I managed to talk uh to
very few people it's very difficult with
the communication and you know some of
them are actually moving from place to
place in the past days looking for a
safe space I mean those people have
moved now to the center but there are
many many others they can't I mean if
you look at elderly people or so or if
you don't have a car or something you
know what what do you do I mean it's
it's just uh the the situation has a lot
of confusion Fusion what to do I mean
we're hearing from the humanitarian
organizations how dire the situation is
uh also you have to understand you know
the electricity uh at least the the
electricity that comes from Israel was
cut off um that has also consequences of
course then the main power plant because
no fuel is coming in has cut off so
there's mainly at least for the civilian
population uh there are all these
problems that have the hospitals of
course then have problems for their
generators the water pumps have problems
so I mean all of this together but I
think the main issue right now for
people in in these areas and also in the
South there have been still air strikes
so is to to find some kind of safe space
but there is basically no safe Zone in
Gaza you're basically trapped in there
and I think this is uh psychologically
also it's it's a very difficult
situation from what I'm hearing there uh
from from people absolutely uh tell us a
little bit more about military
operations um on Friday we know the
Israeli Army said it had conducted raids
into Gaza um both battling militants
there and also looking out for
information about hostages what can you
tell us about what the current situation
is like at the
border well we're here near the Gaza
border and we've been to areas where you
know there's a buildup of Tanks of the
um uh infantry mainly here um I mean at
the moment they're not moving I think
they're waiting now for the next step
for for their orders uh to what comes
next of course you have still uh we had
also rocket barges coming out in the
past half an hour or so from Gaza of
course there's also the Navy around Gaza
and the Mediterranean uh you have the
artillery from here the air strikes on
Gaza so the war is going on um and of
course everybody's waiting now to see
what happens after this uh 4:00 deadline
might it be a bit flexible uh what will
happen next uh we don't know we just
have to to see what the next hours here
will bring and we will be keeping you
posted here on DW thank you so much
Tanya for your reporting that is our
correspondent Tanya Kramer near the
border with
Gaza and I'd like to now bring in Shaya
loow with the Norwegian Refugee Council
warm welcome thank you so much for
taking the time to speak with us I
understand that your organization has
people who've been working in Gaza can
you tell us what they're seeing in terms
of the humanitarian situation
there so we have 52 Palestinian staff
who are from and live and work in Gaza
uh I mean the stories that they are
telling us of what they are experiencing
what they are seeing we have no capacity
right now to even be able to to uh give
a humanit provide a humanitarian
response because our staff needs to
focus on themselves getting to safety
we've heard stories from staff about
challenges after this uh order to to
flee to the south in finding uh Vehicles
fuel in order to make that way some of
our staff are are trying to get to the
southern part of Gaza just by on foot uh
the situation is dire there's no
electricity there except for what people
can muster from either The Limited Fuel
That Remains for generators or solar
panels connectivity is difficult in
terms of people communicating each day
it seems that our ability to even do
something as simple as a headcount to
make sure that our staff are okay is
becoming more and more difficult because
the situation is so dire with Israel's
total blockade uh total Siege on the
Gaza Strip as your correspondent
mentioned preventing fuel uh electricity
food and water from entering and then of
course uh the announcement from Thursday
night at midnight calling on all
residents of Northern Gaza to to flee to
the South that must be terrifying so you
have your own people working for you
fleeing for their lives unable to really
administer Aid to others who need it are
you aware of other organizations who
have been able to um help Supply Aid
there right now while it's most
needed I know that the UN is continuing
to provide as much support as it can and
other organizations that are involved in
uh emergency response like Doctors
Without Borders but I think most of the
humanitarian sector right now we're
Frozen because we we cannot ask our
staff to be responding to a crisis when
they themselves are are victims of that
crisis and need to focus on getting
their family uh to safety yeah now the
Norwegian Refugee Council as Secretary
General we should say um has demanded a
reversal to the Israeli military's
demand that more than a million
civilians relocate from the north to the
south of Gaza can you tell us a little
bit more about what is in this demand
and really more about what is at stake
here uh if this is not
heated I mean it's impossible for pales
alans from for 1.1 million Palestinians
from the north to flee to the South
there are not facilities able to
accommodate that number of people moving
quickly Northern Gaza was really the the
center of Economic and Commercial life
um and where the majority of people in
Gaza live and and there just aren't
facilities available additionally we've
heard uh reports of of Palestinians who
were trying to flee to the South being
killed uh
while trying to escape to the South um
and on top of that there are no
assurances that when people do flee to
the South uh that they that they will be
protected that these will be safe zones
that won't be targeted and so we need
assurances that if people are going to
be evacuated that it needs to be done in
a way in which uh transport can be
arranged and accommodated that doesn't
cause Widespread Panic and chaos and
that allows for for one the accommod
ation of of the influx of people but
also assurances that once hostilities
end that those people are able to return
to their homes thank you so much Shaya
we really appreciate it that is Shaya
low from the Norwegian Refugee
Council thank
you Israel has called up some 360,000
reservists and mass troops and tanks
along the border with Gaza Gaza has been
under siege in a mere constant ground
and air
bombardment Israel say says a senior
Hamas military commander has been killed
in the air
strikes as we've heard Israel believed
to be planning a major ground offensive
although no such decision has yet been
announced I'd like to turn to the
Strategic implications of war as Israel
appears to be readying that ground
offensive in Gaza for more we can speak
to marinaa [__] a war studies
researcher at kings's College London
Marina good to see you let's let's start
on the ground in terms of military
strategy what does Israel need to
consider as it's preparing a massive
offensive against
Hamas good day Claire well first of all
we have seen that there have been raids
in order to prepares a military
operation and to neutralize as many
Hamas Fighters as um the Israeli
military can at the stage and they have
also tried to resolve the hostage
situation which of course complicates
the whole Endeavor uh what is needed
essentially and and this is a very
complex operation because if the ground
operation is to take place on on the
operational and tactical level what the
Israeli military will need is first of
all good intelligence because as they
move from the Sandy Countryside into the
urban areas it will be very difficult to
track down the fighters and because they
are very well Ed Hamas is very well
entrenched and they have been preparing
for this and we have seen that past um
operations have resulted in somewhat
mixed outcomes so these Urban operations
because Hamas is prepared for it and
because there are civilians um also in
these areas the Israeli military will
have to know exactly which location they
have to Target so it will be very slow
and very bloody and very difficult to
use use um military force or kinetic
force discriminately in order not to
create a backlash amongst the population
because for every adversary that is
being killed if there is population
being killed as well this could
essentially aside from the humanitarian
and ethical considerations push the
neutral Palestinian population to
embrace Hamas and to become an adversary
so that is the biggest problem and and
that's why um Precision needs to be
taking into account as well as as I said
good intelligence um command and control
and of course uh from the political side
there needs to be an understanding how
this military operation will wrap up and
what will happen after that in terms of
um reinstating the rule of law in the
territory and whether Israel is ready to
commit um a lot of political and um
monetary assets to Palestine uh to to
the Gaza section in order to govern
there or how this is going to be
resolved this is unclear yeah what do
you think the wider implications are of
a major war between Israel and Hamas How
concerned are you about spillover or a
much wider
conflict well um on the one hand we have
factions that are supporting Hamas such
as Hezbollah and Hezbollah has already
voiced that it it will not shy away from
entering the war should Israel start its
ground operation its incursion into Gaza
so that is the first concern that the
that another front on the Lebanese
border might open which would be very
problematic for Israel another problem
is the fact that um the presence of the
US and and to a lesser extent of the UK
could also potentially lead to
escalation so the idea was um this
military presence would uh serve a as a
deterrent um in order to prevent groups
like hollah from joining the war that
being said um the escalation can take
place not just um because Hamas
Hezbollah will do something but there
can also be
misinterpretation bad intelligence which
could accidentally lead to escalation
and potentially draw the us into this
war and of course we have the Arab
countries Saudi Arabia and Qatar we have
Iran and Syria so all those Regional
players will also be Pro most likely
supporting um Gaza and Hamas because of
the regional makeup so we are risking a
very big war that goes well beyond um
Gaza and we have disturbances in Syria
and Iraq so it it might turn into a huge
war in the Middle East yeah as you say
plenty of room for error and such high
stakes uh Marina thank you for taking
the time to speak with us that's Marina
Moran War studies researcher at Kings
College
London thanks for having
me